all right everybody welcome back to the
art of accomplishment where we explore
how deepening connection with ourselves
and others leads to creating the life we
want with enjoyment and ease I'm Brett
Kistler and today I'm here with another
special guest Tara Howley Tara is a
coach with the art of accomplishment and
she's also a co-founder with Joe Hudson
and she's going to be leading a group
through the master class in this
upcoming cohort which starts in like a
week or two
is there anything else you'd like to say
about yourself Tara
so today I feel like a lover of Nature
and mountains and skiing and with a
couple girlfriends skiing in Colorado
for my birthday so we've been out and it
was snowing today so that's today what I
want to say about myself is I love the
snow and skiing uh I love it too it's
been a couple years since I've actually
gotten back out to the mountains and
skied
and I do miss it especially this past
season oh yeah
[Laughter]
my priorities are out of whack
or work next year yeah yeah let's do
that we're on the slopes with your art
of accomplishment podcast
[Laughter]
skiing podcast art of accomplishing
while skiing
now there's an idea yeah
yeah so speaking of ideas and insights
and wisdom uh what I wanted to talk with
you about today is the journey from from
the aha moment of insight to when it
becomes a lived embodied reality that is
wisdom in our system so that's just kind
of in this work we often have these like
big insights we have these epiphanies
and there's there's a journey from the
moment the moment that you recognize
something the moment that you see it
to your first couple of times testing
reality with it until eventually you're
really living it from a deeply embodied
place where it's just your subconscious
a new reality and so
uh
yeah so without any further Ado I'd love
to just pick your brain on that on that
Journey
which you have been uh beautifully there
to hold space for for me and my process
over the years
yeah I love that journey I love my own
path through that journey and I love
holding space and watching other people
dive in and marinate in the journey and
all the twists and turns and
unknown things that happen in it and a
surprise and I love it
yeah so let's let's get started with
just maybe some like to Define some of
our terms here uh in your view how would
you define Insight what does that mean
Insight is exactly what you just said
that aha moment it's that suddenly
seeing
something from A New Perspective or a
different contact with truth or reality
or a new idea of who you are or a new
idea of your like a shift in the
perception about your identity or the
world or your beliefs
that suddenly leads to that like oh whoa
you know I thought
I thought my anger was bad but it's just
me it's just me protecting my boundaries
kind of shift so changing how we see
something or feel about something or see
ourselves in our place in the world
okay so that's so that's the beginning
of what we're describing this journey
that's the the moment of insight now
what would you how would you define
wisdom I would define wisdom as
once that insight has integrated into
our whole being
we no longer have to remember it oh what
was that inside I had I want to remember
it right now we don't have to do that
it's it's in our muscles it's in our
body it's in our heart our gut and our
mind but our whole being it's integrated
and the word I really love for this it's
coherent it's not just an idea we have
but it's an a deep deep knowing in our
whole being
so so what makes it the Insight isn't
enough per se like what makes it that we
don't have a flash of recognition and
then everything changes immediately
or does that happen is that you know
what I don't know that I've ever seen it
happen immediately but I would not put
it outside of the realm of possibility
I'm guessing somewhere in someone's
personal history they've had an
experience of well bam and everything
changes forever
I that totally may happen what I see
happen more than not is people have well
bam and then nothing changes and right
they have this idea of like oh I just
keep hiring direct reports who I have to
you know they can't do it on their own I
have to do everything for them and they
get rid of one direct report hire
another and it's the same thing over and
over again or someone has a toxic boss
and they're like oh I'm leaving this is
a toxic work environment and then they
step right into another one so they've
had the Insight but they haven't shifted
it because
it's not
they haven't worked on all the reasons
that in that first thought was there
that led to the Insight they haven't
they haven't
made the As we said earlier the journey
from aha moment through the lived
reality like there's this journey once
we have that insight
it's like when you get the map it
doesn't mean you've arrived at your
location you actually have to get in the
car and take all the turns around the
hills and test drive it and
um and play with the insights and get it
you can't see me but I'm like rubbing my
hands it's like getting that palpable
sense of it down in the body so I think
it doesn't happen automatically because
we have to test it we have to play with
it we have to try it out we have to
grow with it and we have to update like
if we had computer systems we have to
update all the computer systems so that
they're all coherent with that insight
yeah one thing that comes up for me
around that is if we were able to get an
insight and it changed everything
immediately
we'd probably be ping-ponging back and
forth between a lot of different
insights and it would be really chaotic
yeah so there's got to be sort of a
like some some processor gating
mechanism by which it insight as an idea
or an epiphany or just one way of seeing
gets to make it through
different layers into your longer term
deeper more subconscious memory
yeah yeah otherwise it would be pretty
yeah like I said chaos yeah and I do
love the idea of ping-ponging that image
not the chaotic version but I think when
Insight happens and we start to
um we start to metabolize it it is a
ping pongy feeling it moves through our
bodies and our organs our heart our gut
our intestines even and our our whole
being in a ping pong fashion or muscles
so yeah there's like a I've also heard
it called titration like
you step in you step back you you kind
of bounce on either side of the line to
figure out where the line is yeah in a
variety of contexts in a variety of
moods and states
until you really have a picture of like
a picture and a felt sense
of how that Insight Works across your
life yeah beautifully said
so how do you how do you get from
insight to wisdom what is the
what if anything do we need or can we do
to facilitate that Journey once we've
had an Insight we're like wow this could
be this could be life-changing if I
really integrate it
how how do we best facilitate that
process
favorite things that I love seeing and
you may have seen this in your practice
too someone has the insight and then
they have this and sometimes people will
sit on it but they'll have this urge to
like stretch or move their bodies after
an Insight in a coaching session or in a
retreat and I love it when people
actually don't sit on that urge which is
one way we can sabotage ourselves but
when they actually just take that gentle
stretch and move the body and that's I
think the very beginning of letting the
Insight sequence through the body how
the body wants to move with it in that
moment so I would say that's the first
and it seems small but the first
first way the Insight starts to
metabolize
yeah I feel like sometimes you'll see
that as like a face cracking yawn
or like a little bit of shaking in the
body yeah yep face yawn breath so the
breath is another one I love
after insights if people can slow things
down to really have the time and space
to just be with the insight and breathe
it slow gentle like six six breath that
letting the belly be soft and a
and on the six count inhale x on a six
count exhale on a six count like just
breathing with it
so the breath and the yawning really
bring that down and then also I will
almost always encourage my clients to go
take a walk after a big session so they
can it's like moving the right side of
the body the left side of the body right
being left brain that helps integrate
those aha movements down into the being
I want to double click yeah oh double
click I love your double clicks double
click yeah yeah I want to double click
on the the part where you said just
being with it and I think that's a
really beautiful and important piece
it's sort of the maybe opposite of that
is
when we have
so often there will be
a pattern will come in and be like okay
now I've seen the Insight what do I have
to do about it and then we make it a
to-do list
right and that's slowing things down
right then in the moment and not trying
to not even trying to understand it or
solve it or make sure it gets
Incorporated but just being with it and
breathing with it
um gives it the time to actually like
sink in into our being so I do love that
slope slowness there
also other ways to help it incorporate
help it integrate would be movement I
said going off for a walk but dancing
like moving the body walking dancing
cuddling
um
uh giggling you know shaking
and then moving any emotions usually the
Insight there's some emotional content
behind it either that grief of having
thought opposite of it or excitement
about it or anger
fear there's usually some emotion that
help was holding the old belief in place
that needs to get moved as well so
moving that
yeah and sometimes the fear of the fear
of stepping into a new open space
as oh my gosh as whatever you are now
after this transformation yeah is that
is another one yeah yep yep and how I
see that fear show up sometimes too is
like fear of losing it there they can't
feel the excitement necessarily about it
so then you know excitement and fear are
so closely wired together that it will
go to fear oh I'm gonna lose this as
opposed to like oh how much are you
actually afraid and how actually excited
are you like and letting the body have
that excitement and the you know the
body wants to move when it's excited
right you see like two year olds I'm
like and they get all right like how
many adults let themselves get that
excited when they have these big aha
moments
yeah and we also have all these
different ways
that we
yeah that we either like that we might
either bring ourselves back into or try
to I don't think we ever really quite
can once the insight has really happened
we can go back to the place before it
but it'll never quite be the same we'll
always see a little bit through it we'll
feel a little bit more of whatever
backlog of emotion that previous belief
system was holding in place and it'll
just be a little bit more uncomfortable
and then the Insight even if we feel
like we've lost it will be that much
easier to regain the next time
and you know there's that that can slow
the process down so like what are what
are some of the ways that you've seen
that that we can get in the way of our
Insight integrating into a deeper wisdom
well the one the first one is the one I
just said people will have this insight
and then they'll be like oh no but I'm
afraid I'm going to lose it so how do I
not lose it how do I hold on to it and
the holding on to it in and of itself in
a way sends a message to the body that
it isn't going to integrate so
um if someone's feeling fear that they
will forget it then gratitude for it is
often one of the best counters just like
moving to like oh I'm so grateful that I
saw that will let go of that grip of
Fear so that's one way to sabotage
another way I see people sabotage
themselves is by beating themselves up
like oh I saw it why am I redoing this
and you know I'm always yeah it just
becomes a new tool for self-abuse I knew
exactly and my whole thing is like how
do we create Paths of gentleness with
ourselves and gentleness is like through
gentleness how quickly we can really
truly grow so beating yourself up would
be a second way
um like oh I know this defending the
knowing is another way I see people
sabotaging when when reflected to them
or when they see when someone else says
something I already know this I know
this but the defense can stop it you
know that defensive act can stop it from
um coming down and metabolizing and
integrating hmm
yeah that that relates to another thing
that I think is very similar
maybe that's where the defense comes
from this this might be where we take
the insight and then we just integrate
it into our identity
but not into our body or into our lives
yes yes yeah we we may we use the
insight as another way to like cement
some sort of identity yeah ouch
[Laughter]
so you mentioned you'd mentioned a few
moments ago about the emotions holding
these holding the belief systems in
place that the Insight sees through and
can you speak a little bit more about
what emotions have to do with insight
and wisdom and the the path
yes but hold on because I just
remembered the other thing I was gonna
say oh great yeah on the sabotage front
which is that we can sabotage ourselves
from the Insight the Insight can come
with those delicious
feeling like a high feeling of like that
ecstasy feeling a ah feeling it can have
this aha it can come with this state
almost like a natural high state
and that state naturally because we
can't hold on to any one state ever
we're not going to stay ecstatically
high or depressed or angry or fear any
sort of State forever so that ecstatic
State naturally leaves and when it
leaves people mistake the ecstatic State
leaving for the actual Insight leaving
yeah so they complete the Insight with
the with the
yes what that with that relief or
whatever the feeling was that went with
it and then that's something else that
they beat themselves up for like oh I
had it and I lost it as opposed to know
what's still there right the state is
gone but what of the learning is still
there what's still being metabolized
yeah yeah I think a
another way that that shows up that I've
seen
is it for attached to
if we're attached to the sort of like
the Bliss of the Epiphany
and when the Bliss goes away we think
the Epiphany has gone away then we're
gonna clearly see the evidence for the
Epiphany having gone away because
uh there
like you said earlier it's unlikely that
you're perhaps possible and it's
definitely worth keeping this open an
open mind to this but when you have the
Epiphany it's likely that you're going
to run into the same thing somewhere
else in your life on a different level
on a deeper level and so when you do
that it doesn't mean that you actually
lost the insight
it just it might just mean that you're
now seeing something on a whole new
level that you hadn't seen before and
it's the same shape yeah and it's
deepening right it's on another it's
that spiral Dynamics it's coming around
to be
um integrated in a deeper more felt
sense way in a more coherent
I'm more deeply understood way yeah yeah
so speaking of like the the felt sense
way in this like getting these like
having these insights really
settle into the body uh I want to come
back to the question about what emotions
have to do with the journey from insight
to wisdom so you know I we love emotions
generally all of them and I deeply
believe that insights are seeing through
an old story or belief or habit story
about self or the world and those
stories are all held in place by an
emotion
the emotions like the glue that holds
pieces of our identity in place any
story around Identity or the world in
place
and the so the glue has to be
um you need to what do you call the
thing that releases glue you know those
solvent yeah and in this case it's
moving the emotions so if there's grief
having a good cry even a good cry that
you believed that story before the aha
moment or shaking off the fear letting
the body shake and move the fear off
I want to give some examples for for
listeners of what would be just to kind
of demonstrate all of this how what
would be an example Insight what would
be the belief system that
that it sees through and an example of
what the kind of emotional glue was that
was holding that belief system in place
and that process of that moving so
it's a great question let me think
um uh someone might have a story when
people get angry it means I've done
something wrong or I'm bad like that's a
common one I see when other people are
angry quote unquote at me it means I've
done something wrong or bad they can
have the Insight that is oh people get
angry and they might be angry at me but
it doesn't mean I've done anything wrong
or bad or doesn't mean I'm bad they
might not be happy with what I'm done
but it doesn't mean I'm bad or they
might have the Insight when people get
angry it might not have anything to do
with me right they're starting to unhook
any identity of I'm bad or did something
wrong from other people's anger
that would be the insight and aha but
then the emotions that have to move in
this case might be their own anger like
that's not okay to put that on me stop
telling me I did something wrong they
might have to move all of their anger of
how how much of their lives they've
spent with like believing the story that
they were about believing that they were
bad or wrong anytime anybody got anger
at him and that it was imprinted in the
first place exactly by you know a parent
or caregiver made them think that or LED
them to think that or whatever LED them
to think that so I would say anger needs
to move usually often Their Fear needs
to move as well because if someone has
that relationship with other people's
anger there's a lot of fear of anger
anger's not safe so they have to move
fear and that's you know just shaking
and then in that case also grief you
know grief of believing for however many
decades that anytime someone's was angry
that they had done something wrong or
bad had a client who talked about when
she was in traffic and a car honked
should jump and look around to see what
she'd done wrong you know
and it was you know it was like four
cars back honking at someone else who
had nothing to do with her but she had
that ingrained belief that she must have
done something wrong if someone honked
so she had to go through the Journey
moving fear grief for all the years and
all the times she thought that random
anger had something to do with her and
her own um fear and then her own anger
of like hey F off that's not okay like
don't put that on me
it's like when you describe going
through that grief of you know all the
years where XYZ was happening I believed
ABC
it's as though there's also like so many
micro insights in that grieving process
because it's you know in my experience
when I'm going through a big grief
process there can be a flashing of
memories that just come out of nowhere I
had no idea that that had actually I
forgot that that even happened and
didn't know that that was driving my
subconscious and filtering my reality
and then
many of the things don't even actually
show up in
in my Consciousness at all they're just
happening subconsciously yes and so it's
almost as though the the process of
emotions moving
and the insights are
kind of the same thing on some level
like the inside is a the mental version
of it or the the seeing
but then the emotional process is just
applying that insight to your deeper
store of Life memories and seeing what
what settles out from that process
that's right or what wants to Bubble up
and move through emotionally and be
re-seen
yeah yeah so you're real you're who who
you how you identify is really different
at the end of the process yeah sometimes
it's sort of like a house of cards too
like or
I'm remembering like playing Dr Mario or
Tetris where sometimes if you hit the
right thing all of a sudden everything
will start to collapse and then
everything will collapse yeah or Angry
Birds I think looks a lot like that
where like you have one insight and if
you like really let that Insight land
all the way in your body it's just gonna
be well there's going to be a whole
bunch of stuff that used to seem
internally consistent about your reality
that is now just ready to collapse too
because if that wasn't true then this
wasn't true and this wasn't true
oh
yeah here we go
yeah right and the abyss is what can
show up yeah in that case yeah tell me a
little bit more about that about the
abyss
so my experience of it is that when all
the stories Fall Away what's left is the
abyss
and it has a million different names but
it is it's the place of no story
right it's the knowing of of
self beyond the story
identifying beyond the story and of
course we have these bodies themselves
and so we have stories but it's having
it's making contact with
um that
that which is beyond the self
so when we have these insights and they
and and really the whole house of cards
starts to fall I remember when I had the
experience it felt like a house of cards
like oh my God every single story a true
and not true in a house of cards and all
the emotions behind them and under it
all was just like nothingness
and spacious nothingness
hmm
which brings me to
another question is how
that might be the answer to this
question but I I'm also curious what
other answer there is like how do you
know when insight has Consolidated
integrated and become wisdom or not even
to imply that there's an end
I want to step back first and say that
um the how House of Cards falling the
whole Tetris game everything falling the
abyss is I don't think that's the goal I
think that's a byproduct
so if someone's having an insight and
then trying to I'm going to integrate
this and then starts working to
integrate it to get to the abyss or
spaciousness nothingness I I think
that's probably going to backfire at
some point I just want to name that so
people aren't going okay I'm gonna
really integrate my aha moments into
wisdom so that I can get spaciousness
yeah well that's another thing with that
state attachment earlier it's like if we
if we're conflating the abyss with the
integration
yeah and then what was the question you
asked right before I wanted to clarify
that yeah so how do you know how do you
know or measure or have how do you track
how insight has become wisdom right
I'd say the easiest way is when you
don't have to remember it
right and you have the insight as I have
to remember that when it you don't have
to remember it because it's just in your
being like that example I used about the
the client with anger thinking she was
bad or wrong when people get angry and
she's like oh what's going on for you
and she has no emotional reaction no
um she doesn't uh get triggered or
tightened up because she's just curious
what's happening like that's when that
insight has been integrated through the
whole it's coherent and integrated in
the body when you don't have to remember
it when you don't have to
um
think about it when it's just there and
natural and um you're not reactive to
the same things that you used to be
reactive to I'd say that's one of the
easiest ways to know
I also want to say I do believe it's
asymptotic I believe that like you said
we can have these insights they can
um integrate through our being moved to
wisdom and then resurface as we develop
and as we evolve in different points in
our life so it's an so wisdom is an
asymptotic ever-changing like it's not a
it's not a hard fast thing that happens
when it's done and never will shift
again yes you know we're always evolving
and learning and growing and deepening
there's an interesting sort of asymmetry
here that I'm seeing where
you know we get the insight and one of
the common responses is to be afraid of
losing the insight
but the actual integration of the
Insight will result in essentially the
Insight will just fall away it's like
the training wheels and it's almost like
like I look forward to the day where I
don't have to remember that like I get
to have my anger or my sadness or that
my wants are important or that I don't
I'm not responsible for
other people's feelings
uh or that it doesn't make me bad or
wrong if someone's judging me
like
if I'm living in a world where I forget
all of that and it's just second nature
then like that's actually like what I'm
looking forward to in an Insight comes
like great there's the inside I can't
wait to just like
I have this no longer even be in my
world so much that I want to hold on to
it yeah that is a great attitude by the
way for the whole process oh I can't
wait to get triggered Again by someone's
anger so I can you know see where it
hasn't integrated through my system and
I can't wait till someone honks at me on
the road and I can see like oh what's
what emotion is left or what story is
left around this
yeah yeah it's like being in Wonder with
with the insight and the whatever wisdom
is arising from it like oh cool if I if
I just forget this what what happens
what do I get where do I get to discover
this again
okay
well beautiful what else would you would
you like to say
what else would I like to say
um I would say marinate in the journey
anybody having the aha moment like take
it take take it and roll with it and
marinate it and steep in it and enjoy it
and be gentle with yourself like this
everything we do here is about
self-compassion and having more
compassion for ourselves and others so
with that aha moment once it happens how
can you be gentle and compassionate with
yourself and love yourself through the
whole process and and really enjoy the
whole process even the um
you know crunchy bits yeah yeah alluding
back to something you'd said earlier
about
recognizing the way that the belief
system
was serving you I think there's
something that can happen when we have
an insight and then we're like
uh disgust towards whatever previous
thought we had and then
and then we're just doing the thing
again we're pushing some part of our
experience into the shadow into this
beating up a part of ourselves right
that was a certain that those stories
came up to protect us they served us we
wouldn't have had them if they weren't
protecting helping serving Us in some
ways they might not serve us anymore but
they for sure did at some point so right
appreciating them being gentle with them
with that part of ourselves
yeah loving loving loving it all
yeah
beautiful yeah thank you so much I love
doing doing this episode with you I want
more
I adore you are you bread it's so much
fun
yay yeah
all right thank you everybody for
listening if you enjoyed this please
share it with somebody that you think
would enjoy it just as much or even more
see you next time
ciao
[Music]
thank you